Scoring schemes, in order to be reliable, have to reflect physic-chemical and biological features. Scoring schemes are NxN matrices. In the case of genetic sequences the matrix is a 4 by 4 matrix with each row and column corresponding to each base, while, in the case of protein sequences it's a 20 by 20 matrix. On the diagonal (where amino acids/bases are paired with the same one) we have the maximum score, off the diagonal score are lower. In fact every pairs is associated with the probability that an amino acid can be substituted with itself or another one. The most common scoring schemes used are PAM and BLOSUM. They were developed with different aims. PAM (Point accepted mutation, developed by Dayoff in 1979, is based on an evolutionary model derived from the study of 57 protein family that contained proteins that shared at least 85% sequence identity with each other. It is based on the fact that one point mutation in a certain position and in a certain event does not affect the next mutation, the mutation events are independent. 1PAM scoring matrix means that it's evaluating how similar two sequences are with 1 evolutionary unit distant. This means that every 100 residues it occurs 1 point mutation. PAM-N is a matrix that expresses the score of two sequences that are N evolutionary unit apart, it derives from the multiplication of N times PAM1 (PAM1^N). This scoring scheme is based on global alignment and it is more efficient with sequences that share high percentage of sequence identity. On the contrary, BLOSUM (BLOcks SUbstitution Matrix) is based on local alignment and it was developed in 1992 by Henikoff and Henikoff in order to have a scoring matrix more precise for those sequence that share lower percentage of sequence identity. It was derived by a set of data taken from the BLOCKS database, it stored blocks of sequences derived by local alignment (usually protein domain, or well conserved regions of proteins). It's not based on a model but on actual local alignments and the score is given by the formula: s=log10(P(ab)/((Pa)*(Pb))) [see the paper], where Pab is the probability of finding the pair ab in the alignment, while Pa and Pb are the probabilities of finding the amino acid A and B over the total of amino acids. There are different BLOSUM matrices, that differs from the number, we can have BLOSUM62, BLOSUM50 and so on, the number stands for the fact that those matrices are developed on those blocks derived by local alignment of sequences that had less than that number of sequence identity. 
So, given an alignment, the scoring matrix returns a score, if the score is high we can make some assumptions, based on the value of sequence identity we can infer annotations if the sequence identity is higher than 30% (in the case of homology modeling), we can derive residues that are conserved, such as protein domains, we can derive the protein family of a specific protein sequence. 
Needleman and Wunch algorithm is a global alignment method that finds the optimal alignment given two sequences.
